     When speaking to food manufacturers around the world, demand forecasting seems to be a prominent issue that keeps them up at night. Yet, while many companies consider demand forecasting important, several still are not addressing it through improvement programs. The problem sometimes stems from a lack of understanding of how to improve forecast accuracy (or that it can be improved), as well as what the improvement is worth in terms of profit and asset utilization.
Demand forecasting helps companies in several readily apparent areas, such as production, scheduling and customer service. Food manufacturers have traditionally found that there is usually an obvious increase in inventory associated with customer service level improvements. However, being able to rebalance or reclassify inventory as a result of improved forecast accuracy can produce significant improvements in customer service without increasing overall inventory value.
The ability to produce these improvements even as raw material costs increase is a real attention-getter for several food manufacturers, including a recent Silvon Software customer for which raw materials represent the second largest cost after labor. This food manufacturer has a lot of perishable product moving from plants to distribution centers to stores around the country. If its forecast is off by as little as one percent, the company’s fuel and packaging costs can soar, quickly bleeding the bottom line. This is especially true today, since the wildly fluctuating cost of oil affects not only transportation costs, but also the cost of film used to package products. Just because this company’s fuel costs may be rising, that doesn’t mean it can go to a mass merchandiser, such as Wal-Mart, and raise its prices. The end result would be lost shelf space, as competitors who did a more effective job of demand management are able to deliver product to the mass merchandisers at a lower cost.
Another issue is promotional periods. If a food manufacturer underestimates forecasts for key promotional periods such as holidays, mass merchandisers will quickly turn to other suppliers for product - and those same merchandisers will remember the manufacturer’s shortfall the next time a promotional period hits. For instance, ricotta cheese is very popular just before Easter and Thanksgiving. For a company in the dairy business, if it doesn’t hit those promotional periods on time, it can lose its shelf space quickly – and perhaps, for a long time.